Now, did the Navy interest you, and the Navy
specifically contact you about trying to
discover what happens to sound in the ocean? Yes,
Ross and Bennett came out with the scripts. Talked
to Spurrier, but Fleming and me. Okay, and how long
did you work on that? Oh, quite a while. Okay. Did
that carry on to when you began to work in the Navy in
1941? Yeah. Okay. We didn't start until about
1940. Oh, all right. Now, you said one time that the
that the 1950s and 60s will be recorded as one of the
great ages of exploration, for an exact quote. But
it seems to me from your discussion here that the
30s must have been a great age of exploration. What
seems to you to be the difference in the two? The
scale. The scale, okay. What major changes in
technique would you suggest that occurred
between the 50s and 60s and the 30s? The
introduction of electronics.
We used to have a saying in the 1930s, early 1940s,
we wanted less than one vacuum tube per
instrument.
The great difference was really the development
of instrumentation during World War II.
In the 1950s and the 1960s, we were exploiting that
Those great advances, not so much in actual
instruments as in how to make instruments.
And you think that the development of
instrumentation came out of the work in the
military services? Pretty largely, yeah. Now,
I'm familiar with the work that came out of the Air
Force School of Meteorology that develops
between 1942 and 1945. It produced a goodly number
of well-known oceanographers. What about the
U.S. Navy? What would you suggest to be their major
developments between 1941 and 1945? In
what? In terms of instrumentation. Well, the main
thing was the development of underwater sounds of
all kinds, both
echo sounders and horizontal ranging devices.
great interest that developed in the Navy in the
propagation of sound in the ocean. But there were
also developments in what we call magnetometers,
that is, methods of measuring various magnetic
phenomena on the bottom and in the water by the
so-called towed magnetometer, which really came
out of the work on magnetic mines.
Now, weren't you in the radio and sound lab in San
Diego in 41 and 42? What exactly was your work
there? Well, I was in a sailor's suit. I forgot to
tell you that in 1934, I went on a cruise on the USS
Bushnell, which is the flagship of the submarine
force. It was just one submarine force, Atlantic
and Pacific. And the Bushnell went up to Alaska,
about halfway out on the Aleutian Islands, and
then south to Hawaii. And I ran a line of
oceanographic stations between the Aleutian
Islands and the Hawaiian Islands, one of the first
oceanographic sections across that part of the
Pacific, really the first section across that
part of the Pacific.
This was primarily physical oceanography, as we
used to call it, and chemical oceanography. That
is, measurements of the silica, the oxygen, the
nitrate, the phosphate, the temperature and
salinity of the water.
And it was those data that I went to Norway with in
1936, 37. And
as a result of this experience on the Bushnell,
The captain of the ship was a man named Abel T.
Bidwell. I remember his name. And I also remember
the name of the admiral. His name was Cyrus W. Cole.
This was a great experience in my life, this trip,
this summer on this Navy ship. There were various
other people on board. One was a man named Leo
Bachmann. I remember him quite well. I don't
remember the names of the others. Anyhow, Bidwell
persuaded me to try for a Naval Reserve
Commissioner, which I did, and I got that in 1936.
So in 1941, when this Navy Radio and Sound Labs got
started here in San Diego, and when the University
of California Division of War Research was
established there, I went on active duty and
became a project officer for various kinds of
things. Whereas Fairdrip and Fleming and Walter
Monk and the others worked as civilians in the
University of California in the Division of War
Research.
We had a
skipper of the Navy Radio and Sound Laboratory. It
was a martinet named Red Rubel. He was a real
sundowner.
This means various things to me, but in his case it
meant he was a complete son of a pig. That's what it
meant in the Army, sir. He was an impossible man.
And I was on his staff.
And he would send us, he would send me out with a
group of chief petty officers and one or two
scientists on various kinds of field
expeditions. For example, in San Francisco Bay,
we looked at the oceanographic conditions at the
mouth of the Golden Gate, and then we did the same
thing up at Neah Bay at the mouth of the Straits of
Juan Fuca.
Two of the scientists on those expeditions were
Waldo Lyon, who has since become a great expert on
the Arctic Oceanography. He was a physicist, a
young physicist from UCLA, and a man named Jeffrey
Holder, H-O-L-T-E-R, who was an idea man. He was a
graduate student of physics, too. Idea men are a
very peculiar breed, as you probably know. They
have lots of ideas, and most of them are not very
good, but some of them are very good. He was
constantly interested in the original
experiments of various kinds. Anyhow, we worked
together on these surveys. Every time I came back
to the survey, I found I had a different desk and a
different job.
And I got involved with radar propagation. I
started a radar operator's school at the Navy
Radio and Sound Laboratory, which later became
the CIC school that still exists down here in San
Diego. a great big establishment now, but it
started with six scared, stupid, enlisted men who
were sent by their skippers because they didn't
know what else to do with them. To be our first
class. They were just awful.
But we decided we just couldn't teach guys like
this how to operate radars. We'd have to have
standards. So we insisted after that that We would
only take people who had passed a certain score on
the Navy's intelligence test. In fact, I've
forgotten the name of it. But it wasn't called an
intelligence test, but that's really what it was.
And after that, they got better, and this thing
really developed. After a while, it developed
into a great big establishment.
But this was, of course, a very dull job, teaching
radar operators. to teach the same thing over and
over again. And the one saving grace of it was that
we would range on San Clemente Island. It's about
70 miles west of San Diego. And sometimes you could
see it, and sometimes you couldn't. And why was
this?
Well, it turned out, of course, the reason was that
the radar beam was refracted by the structure of
the atmosphere. Sometimes it was bent down.
Sometimes it wasn't bent.
And there were two good physicists who got
involved with this. One was named Frank Abbott.
And I
can't think of the name of the other one. I know him
very well. And of course, once they got into it,
well, I had to fade away. I just didn't know enough,
electromagnetic theory.
That was one of the problems of being a geologist,
was that you never really knew much about
anything. But the first paper on radar
propagation written out here was, I was one of the
authors of that. And this, of course, has now
become a science all by itself. This was in the, so I
really got out of the, of the sound propagation
study by getting involved with this radar school.
And my friend, Rosson Bennett, by this time had
gone to Washington as the head of the design branch
of the electronics division of the Bureau of
Ships.
And I got in touch with him and said, I just got to get
out of here. This is impossible. So he arranged for
me to come to Washington. be assigned to the
hydrographic office. This was in the winter of
1942.
I went out to the hydrographic office. The
hydrographer was an old guy, a nice old admiral
named Brian. Didn't really have any idea about
World War II or what in the world an oceanographer
could do. So he put me to work looking at a bank. that
had been found somewhere off the coast of Panama.
This bank was very interesting because it didn't
exist. Some ships had picked it up on their
bathometers, on their echo cylinders. And other
ships passing over the same spot couldn't find it.
Clearly, what it was was a deep scattering. But the
guys out here were just finding out about the deep
scattering layer at that time. Yeah, they were
working out here in the Office of Naval Research.
Oh, that was the University of California
Division of War Research. Division of War
Research, right. Russell Raitt and Martin
Johnson, particularly. They did two great
things. One was to find the deep scattering layer.
The other was to, Martin Johnson, to solve the
problem of crackle, the background noise that you
got from mines. not front lines, but background
noise that got into the sonar gear, which affected
also acoustic lines.
It turned out the way Martin did this was to ask,
well, in fact, Martin was responsible for both
these discoveries. In the case of the deep
scattering layer, he asked the following
question, what happens to it at night? And the And
it turned out that at night it didn't exist. The
scattering was just below the surface, not at
depths of 100 or 200 meters. He said it must be due to
organisms, because that's the way marine
organisms behave. They go down in the daytime and
up at night. And that, of course, is what turned out
was right. In the case of the crackle, he said,
where does it exist? And it didn't exist
everywhere. It only existed over certain kinds of
bottoms.
And he said that he guessed that these must be an
organism called a snapping shrimp, which lives in
rocky bottoms and sandy bottoms, not in muddy
bottoms. And he got some of these shrimp. He got one
shrimp and put it in a little jar and put a
microphone in the jar and called it a hydrophone
because it's underwater.
continuous popping noise like bacon fries. And
clearly that was what it was. So these were two
biological discoveries of very considerable
interest.
But
anyhow, that was what Brian wanted me to do with
this bank, this non-existent bank. I didn't think
that was a very military thing to do.
So I went back to Ross and Bennett, and he said,
well, we'll give you additional duty in the Bureau
of Ships,
in the underwater sound section of the Bureau of
Ships,
the underwater sound section of the design branch
of the electronics division of the Bureau of
Ships. And I became code 940C, or 940D, I guess it
was.
My boss was a
a man named Jacob Myers, a wonderful guy about my
age. He was a commander, and I started out as a
lieutenant and eventually became a commander
myself.
And we got along very well. I became the Bureau of
Ships oceanographer, and I worked with all kinds
of people. And I really became project officer for
work that was being done at Woods Hole and at
Scripps. the oceanographic work in radio and
sound at the University of California Division of
War Research, and the related work that was being
done in New London in the underwater, a place
called USNASL, U.S. Navy Underwater Sound Lab.
Now, was Sir Edward Bullard involved in that? No,
he was in England. I mean, the one in England. He was
involved in many things, but the two principal
things he did during the war were to work on
acoustic, on the first on the magnetic minds, and
then on acoustic minds, and finally on the
so-called oyster mind. The oyster mind was a
diabolical device. It still is diabolical.
It depends upon the negative pressure wave made by
the passage of a ship. And you can't sweep it. The
only thing that was sweepable set it off as a ship.
So you could sweep it by dragging the ship along.
And the other thing he was involved with was the
operating research business.
He's a first-rate physicist, and had done a lot of
geophysical work even before the war,
measurements of gravity and measurements of
magnitude. I would say that he's probably the
greatest living geophysicist.
But anyhow, I never met him during the war at all. We
did come in contact with George Deacon, my group. I
worked very closely with a man named Lyman
Spitzer, who is now a professor of astronomy at
Princeton, and after the war went into the
thermonuclear fusion business. He's a very, very
able man. He has an IQ about 40 points higher than
mine.
No problem was too difficult for him. He was
fantastic. And he had something called the
Underwater Sonar Analysis Group, which was part
of the NDRC. And I was his opposite number in the
Bureau of Ships. So we worked very closely
together for many years, all during the war and
after the war. Out here at Scripps, or at UCDWR,
rather, I worked with Carl Eckhardt, who was also a
first-rate
physicist. He was a theoretical physicist. Like
so many theoretical physicists in the 1920s, who
started in the 1920s, he came very close to to
winning a Nobel Prize, but didn't. Because these
guys were all in competition with each other in
Germany. Somebody else came up with the
publication a few weeks before he did. But up until
1941, he was a professor of theoretical physics at
the University of Chicago. His student was
Leonard Lieberman. He's still on the faculty of
Scripps. Carl Eckhardt himself died two years
ago,
three years ago. And Eckhardt really
revolutionized the underwater sound business by
treating it statistically rather than by this ray
theory of ours. I don't think I understand that.
What's the difference between a ray theory and a
statistic treatment? In the ray theory, we
essentially assumed that the sound waves
followed a path, a single path.
And the ray is essentially at right angles to the
wave. You can trace the path of the wave by drawing a
ray.
That gives you some useful insights. But
statistical theory was more powerful because, in
fact, the ocean is so complicated. The problems of
reverberation, for example, the problems of
background noise, the problems of scattering,
and of absorption of sound are all related to the
microstructure of the ocean as well as to the
macrostructure.
The best way to study these things is to look at the
statistics, that is, what's the frequency of
different events.
You study reverberation, what's the pattern of
reverberation, statistical pattern, and time.
One of the great advantages of this is that you can
integrate over time.
He was a,
he'd written a famous paper,
what he called Irreversible Thermodynamics,
which he dealt with phenomena of this general
kind, phenomena of hydrodynamic, thermodynamic
phenomena.
And this was written actually before the war. And
his interest really shifted then from nuclear
physics and atomic physics to this field of
hydrodynamics and thermodynamics. And he made
great contributions into the theory of it,
but never very much to the end. And to some extent to
the practice, too. He wrote a classical. series of
volumes after the war on the propagation of
underwater sound, right after the war. Still,
probably the most important book ever written on
the subject, series of books, written for the
NDRC,
National Defense Research Committee. And there
were a lot of people down there at the CDWR who were
developing instrumentation and had ideas of
various kinds about the various kinds of energy in
the ocean. One of the amusing stories was that when
we were first there, it was full of hot shots from
the physics department at Berkeley, led by Ernest
Lawrence. They had McMillan and a
whole group of people. Lawrence had the idea that
these damned ocean arguments were stupid, which
they were. And the thing to do instead of fooling
around with sound, as we had been doing, was to just
get a big light underwater and he'd see us up there.
And his idea was that What we'd been doing is
fooling around with things that were too small and
too inexpensive. If you just got a big enough
light, you'd be able to see a long way. So they
started a whole optical group down at DC, at DWR,
under his direction, or at least his inspiration,
headed actually by a man named Ike Bowen of
Caltech, who was the later director of the a very
nice, competent man. And they built this huge
searchlight with millions of candle power. And
they had a black sock 20 feet across and a couple
hundred feet long to be a sort of imitation
submarine. And the problem was how far it went. And
then they tested out the searchlight. Well, you
could see this sock about 20 feet short.
Well, Lawrence decided maybe this wasn't such a
good idea. The problem, of course, was that the
scattering of light in the water created so much
background that you didn't get any contrast. But
they made a lot of studies of the propagation of
light and the transmission of light in the ocean.
And they had several problems which we
oceanographers thought we could help them with.
And we could. One of the problems was the damn
instruments leaked. Of course, they'd never done
any work on this. It's really a very difficult
condition of salt water and pressure, high
pressure, highly corrosive water. And so they'd
lower the thing in the water and ruin everything.
They'd have to take it out and start all over again.
Finally, they got them so they wouldn't leak. And
they went out and made a series of measurements
about 50 miles offshore here and measured the
transmission at different depths. And the guy
that did it was a man named Malcolm Henderson. He
said, OK, we measured the transmission of light in
the seawater. And Sverdrup and I said, well, why
don't you go over here and try it again? We knew we
were on the inside of a front. Well, he finally did,
and of course, he got completely different
results. There's no relationship at all between
the two, between the set two series of
measurements. And so the next conclusion was you
can't measure the transmission of light and see
why it's too variable. So we said, well, now you go
over here, and you'll find it's like it was the
first time. You go there, and you'll find it like it
was the second time, which of course was true, more
or less. But anyhow, they had kind of lost interest
in us because this damn sock didn't work very well.
And then anyhow,
all these hot shots disappeared all of a sudden.
And we had heard that they went to a place called
Shangri-La.
And this was, of course, Los Alamos, as we found out
after the war.
still quite a few physicists left and quite a few
engineers left. And they worked for years on a mine
detecting. One of the big things they did was work
on a mine detecting sonar. Well, they didn't start
out that way. They started out with what they
called variable frequency sonar, essentially
frequency modulated sonar. And it turned out that
this might be useful in detecting mines. And we had
a submarine force had a real problem. They
couldn't get it to the Japan Sea. because the
Japanese had planted floating mines in Tsushima
Strait and the other strait between Hokkaido and
Honshu.
And
all during the war until the summer of 1945, none of
our submarines ever went into the Japanese sea.
But finally, we and the Bureau of Ships, in this
section I'm telling you about, the underwater
sound section, managed to get 12 submarines
equipped with these sonars developed here at San
Diego, at the UCDWR. And they did go into the Japan
Sea.
And this is the irony of it. By that time, the Japan
Sea was essentially empty. They sank 25,000 tons
of shipping and lost a submarine. And what had
happened was that the oyster mines had been
planted in all the Japanese harbors. And it
essentially just stopped. All traffic back and
forth from then showed up. These were planted by
the 29th Bomb Com, the 29th Bomber Command, flying
up from Marianas.
And they dropped these mines in the harbors. I was
at the harbors, and the Japanese just couldn't get
through them.